Most people who install a coding
agent harness use it in first
gear. They connect a model, ask
a few chat questions, and plateau
there. The powerful features, skills, context
files, MCP servers, subagents, are invisible
and intimidating. Garnish fixes that by
turning the harness into a game.
Garnish is a gamified onboarding layer
for agentic coding harnesses. You start
with agent chat and nothing else.
You level up by completing quests
that are verified against real behavior,
not self-reported checkboxes. Completing quests unlocks
the next tier of harness features,
which physically appear in the harness
as they unlock. Three properties make
it work. First, quests run through
a real harness against real files.
Second, the agent is the tutor.
The active quest is injected into
the harness context, so the agent
you are learning to use is
also your guide. Third, feature gating
keeps the surface area matched to
your competence. It is built with
Bun and TypeScript. Two artifacts share
one core library. A thin CLI
handles onboarding and status outside a
session. A Pi extension runs in-process
inside the harness, observing live events,
rendering a HUD, and applying unlocks.
The core library has five modules.
Domain schemas define quests, levels, and
checks using Zod with branded types.
The pack loader validates curriculum files
and builds the quest graph, rejecting
cycles and unknown IDs. The verifier
evaluates checks against live events and
on-demand probes. The progression engine folds
an append-only event log into state.
And the Pi adapter isolates all
harness-specific knowledge behind one seam. Running
garnish init installs a certified Pi
runtime into Garnish-owned storage. It asks
three onboarding questions, scaffolds a disposable
sandbox, and launches an isolated session.
Your global harness config is never
touched. The extension performs a startup
version handshake and pauses quests if
the runtime does not match. When
you complete a quest, the extension
observes real harness events. The verifier
evaluates declarative checks against those events
and on-demand file, command, and git
probes. No LLM grading. Everything is
deterministic. The whole path is designed
for sub-ten-second feedback. Quests declare checks
in a closed DSL. Nine check
types cover harness events, file existence,
JSON and YAML config paths, command
exit codes, git state, MCP handshakes,
skill validity, and user confirmation. The
set only grows by architectural decision.
Completing quests unlocks harness features. The
gate catalog maps each feature to
Pi config surfaces. Tools apply live
through setActiveTools. Skills and extensions require
a session reload. Unlocks are monotonic.
Capabilities are only ever added, never
removed. State lives in an append-only
event log. A pure function folds
the log into the current state,
completed quests, XP, badges, and unlocked
capabilities. Delete the state file and
replay reconstructs everything. Crash-safe, auditable, replayable.
The curriculum uses a gamer-native theme.
Tutorial Island for onboarding. First Quest
for the core agent loop. Lore
for context management. Five more levels
are planned, from Skill Tree through
Loadout, The Party, and Macros, to
a Final Boss capstone. The codebase
is four days old. Five thousand
four hundred lines of TypeScript source,
four thousand eight hundred lines of
tests. That near one-to-one test ratio
reflects a fixture-driven proof plan. The
largest file is the verifier at
nine hundred thirty-six lines, the main
complexity hotspot. A v2 direction is
already captured. Garnish will build its
own purpose-built harness and TUI, dropping
the Pi dependency. The curriculum and
engine survive the rewrite. The adapter
and extension get replaced. Garnish teaches
agentic coding craft by doing. Real
harness, real quests, real verification. Earn
your complexity.